# COATI-Model-Evaluation
This repository contains all necessary materials and code for replicating the experiments and analyses presented in my report on the [COATI model](https://github.com/terraytherapeutics/COATI). It includes detailed scripts and notebooks for training the model from scratch using the GuacaMol dataset, conducting linear probing tasks, and analyzing molecular generation capabilities.

# Setup Installation

1. **Clone the Repository:**
   Clone the repository to your local machine to get started with the setup.

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/StefanHangler/COATI-Model-Evaluation.git
   cd molecule-generation
   ```

2. **Create and Activate a Virtual Environment:**
   - For Unix/macOS systems:
     ```bash
     python3 -m venv env
     source env/bin/activate
     ```
   - For Windows:
     ```bash
     python -m venv env
     .\env\Scripts\activate
     ```

3. **Install the Package:**
   Install the package using `pip` which will handle all dependencies automatically.

   ```bash
   pip install .
   ```

This will install the COATI-Model-Evaluation package and all required dependencies, setting up the environment for running or extending the application.

# Molecule Generation
This repository contains a Python script for generating molecular structures using various pretrained PyTorch models. The models are implemented following an abstract base class to ensure a consistent interface for molecule generation.

## Features
- Abstract base class for molecule generators to ensure consistency and reusability.
- Predefined classes for generating molecules with specific pretrained models.
- Easy extension to include new molecule generation models.

## Generating Molecules

### Run Script
Execute the main script to generate molecules:
```
python generate_molecules.py
```

This will generate molecules using all configured models and save them to CSV files in the current directory.

### Adding a New Model

To add a new model for molecule generation, follow these steps:

1. **Implement the New Model Class:**
   Create a new Python class that inherits from `MoleculeGenerator`. Implement all abstract methods:
   - `load_model()`: Method to load your model and tokenizer.
   - `generate_molecules()`: Method to generate molecules using the model.

   Example:
   ```python
   class NewModelGenerator(MoleculeGenerator):
       def __init__(self, device, doc_url):
           super().__init__(device)
           self.doc_url = doc_url
           self.model, self.tokenizer = self.load_model()

       def load_model(self):
           # Load your model and tokenizer here
           return model, tokenizer

       def generate_molecules(self, num_molecules=100):
           # Logic to generate molecules
           return generated_molecules
   ```

2. **Integrate the New Model into the Main Script:**
   Instantiate your model in the main script and call the `generate_molecules()` method.
   
   ```python
   new_model = NewModelGenerator(device, model_url)
   molecules = new_model.generate_molecules(100)
   new_model.save_molecules(molecules, "new_model_generated_molecules.csv")
   ```

## Evaluating Generated Molecules

The provided script offers comprehensive evaluation metrics for generated molecules, including validity, novelty, uniqueness, and the Fréchet ChemNet Distance (FCD) score. These metrics are crucial for assessing the quality of molecules generated by different models.

### Evaluation Metrics

- **Validity**: Measures the percentage of chemically valid molecules using RDKit.
- **Novelty**: Measures the proportion of generated molecules that are not found in the training set.
- **Uniqueness**: Assesses how unique the generated molecules are within the generated set.
- **FCD Score**: Compares the distribution of generated molecules to a reference set using a deep learning model to compute the FCD.

### Running the Evaluation

To evaluate generated molecules, follow these steps:

1. **Prepare your dataset**: Ensure your generated molecules are stored in a format compatible with the script, typically as `.csv` files containing SMILES strings.
2. **Specify the paths**: Modify the `path_list` dictionary in the script to point to your generated molecule files.
3. **Load training data**: Update the `training_smiles_path` variable to point to your training dataset. This dataset is used to compute novelty and as a reference for the FCD.
4. **Run the script**: Execute the script to calculate the evaluation metrics. Results are printed to the console and can be saved to a CSV file for further analysis.

### Example Usage

Here is an example of how to call the evaluation function for a set of generated molecules:

```python
from guacamol.evaluate_guacamol import evaluate_guacamol

generated_smiles = ["CCO", "Oc1ccccc1"]
training_smiles = ["CCO", "CC"]

evaluate_guacamol(
    generated_smiles=generated_smiles,
    training_smiles=training_smiles,
    model_name="ExampleModel"
)
```

This will output the validity, novelty, uniqueness, and FCD score for the `ExampleModel`. Adjust the `training_smiles` and `generated_smiles` variables as necessary to reflect your datasets.

# License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE.md](LICENSE) file for details.
